welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson the late Milton Friedman one of
the greatest economists of the 20th
century said of our guest today that
quote he understands economics in all
its subtlety close quote an academic the
author of obscure tomes know a
television personality and the author
most recently of know they can't
uncommon knowledge today john stossel
welcome to uncommon knowledge I'm Peter
Robinson be sure to join us on our
website at Hoover dot o-r-g slash UK or
on facebook at facebook.com slash UNC
knowledge facebook.com slash hunk
knowledge joining us today john stossel
host of the Thursday primetime show on
Fox Business stossel before joining Fox
mr. stossel a graduate of Princeton
spent almost three decades at ABC he has
won 18 Emmys and published two
bestsellers give me a break and myths
lies and downright stupidity mr.
stossel's new book no they can't why
government fails but individuals succeed
john stossel welcome thank you you
brought a sign with you I want to ask
about the signing right away not every
but guest walks in with a sign John I'm
a TV guy I like props I have this
fantasy that the Tea Party will respond
to this book and the know they can't
title is in response to the hysteria
last election of yes we can and we can
but we to them became government and I
would say no they can't so my fantasy is
that there'll be Tea Party people going
to state capitals in Washington saying
no they can't because because they can't
because they can't know they can't quote
the natural human instinct is to say why
doesn't the government do something what
government usually does is make the
problem worse why don't we ever learn a
close quote right there three sentences
right at the beginning of the book
you have the grounds there for at least
one thesis in American political theory
first of all why is it the natural human
instinct to say the government they
somebody ought to do something I think
because we grew up with mommy and daddy
who run our lives and then our ancestors
grew up in clans of fifty hundred two
hundred people where if you didn't
listen to the clan leader you were dead
and didn't give birth to us you had to
harvest the fruit when he said it was
time to harvest the fruit and those who
did live to give birth to us so we're
programmed to take orders from
Washington we want to and also we have
lives life is complex I can't get my
brain around how you build a sewage
treatment plant myself my instinct is to
say let them do it and Thomas Jefferson
said it's the natural progress of things
for government to grow all right you
organize no they can't around several
dozen very compelling summary statements
and every summary statement takes the
form what intuition tempts us to believe
and what reality has taught me so let's
take a few right at the top here no they
can't quote what intuition tempts us to
believe when there's a problem
government should act what reality
taught me individuals should act not
government close quote why a preference
for individual action over collective
action through the government just from
what I've observed in 43 years of
reporting I mean Milton Friedman got two
things wrong one was proposing
withholding tax which made oh not he
admitted he got that wrong yes right the
other one was this blurb for my book
that you read where he said I understand
economics and all its subtleties it I
was a psychology major I don't
understand this so much I don't
understand about economics but as a
consumer reporter and I stayed on the
beat because I'm a stutterer and I
didn't want to go out there and compete
with Sam Donaldson and the other people
screaming at press conferences I stayed
there and watched the market work and I
got some sense how people work things
out and often for profit
we'll do amazingly clever and successful
things out of self-interest well
government MUX it up and it would happen
again and again as a consumer reporter I
would call for government to fix this
and you know they would pass all these
rules it would make things cost more but
it wouldn't make it better and they
couldn't even get rid of the obvious
fraud the burned fat way asleep pills
and the breast enlargers they're still
selling that stuff so all the regulation
didn't do any good but quietly the
private sector performs miracles no they
can't once again what intuition tempts
us to believe someone needs to plan and
the central planners know best what
reality taught me no one knows enough to
plan a society John you're you quote
Friedrich Hayek a pal of Milton Friedman
while we're talking about Milton
Friedman and Hayek this observation that
there's too little information to plan
centrally Hayek's writing when the
Soviets are trying to plan come up with
5-year plans and so forth but he's
writing in the middle of the 20th
century now we have so much more
information all kinds of data rolling
into Washington wave after wave
so surely you'd have to grant for
example with regard to Obamacare that
even if the government can't plan the
health economy in detail surely it has
enough information now about costs and
procedures to give it at least overall
direction no I can't agree to that and
even if it did it doesn't know what you
or I are going to do next or going to
want next it can't no you may want every
ounce of health care and you may choose
to spend your last penny on health care
I'm someone who would rather take risks
and have a shorter life and government
can't know it for everybody
Hayek also said the curious task of
economics is to teach men how little he
knows about what he imagines he can
design and that's right on still right
off my job to convince Bill O'Reilly now
good luck good luck one more from from
no they can't
that I think is especially important as
we head into the campaign season
presidential campaign season again what
intuition tempts us to believe the
important thing is to have heroic
leaders what reality taught me real
heroes don't control other people's
lives right I'm suspicious of the
student council presidents who will want
to run other people's lives you don't
you don't your your your of just the
right generation to have been moved by
John Kennedy's inaugural address you
don't like the heroic mode in American
politics
I was moved by that hell I'm a sucker I
was moved by Lyndon Johnson's Great
Society how he was gonna care poverty
you have low standards but I watched
them work and I was gung-ho calling for
more regulation
I watched it fail I I'm not as smart as
you or maybe some of you I it took me 15
years to figure out that that wasn't
working all right
segment to the education of John Stossel
you attend in Princeton in the late
1960s this is at the height of hippie
movement the anti-war movement is well
underway you majored in psychology and
your hero you admit all this amazingly
enough your hero was Ralph Nader if you
were called upon to give an account of
yourself as a college student what
defense would you offer what was in your
head that was admirable to have been in
the head of an 18 and 19 and 20 year old
at Princeton University in the late 60s
little that you were well I also have to
admit that I wasn't paying all that much
attention I was interested in poker and
meeting women and trying to get good
grades with the least amount of work but
Nader had gone to Princeton and I never
tended to become a TV reporter but I
fell into this job where I was doing
research and then became a consumer
reporter and Ralph Nader was the guy who
started all that he caught geuman GM had
him followed it wasn't hard to see who
the bad guys were there the big company
had this in
the gate of eternal not journalist
activist followed by private detectives
they wear suits the activists wear blue
jeans the blue jean guys obviously are
the good guys and the Corvair is unsafe
at any speed turns out it was no worse
than any other car but that started me
on a crusade he's doing it by getting
activists to push it I can do it on
television so you were I actually think
you're saying something pretty profound
there about a lot of American journalism
which is to say that it's an easy
extension from the college kid who's up
at night playing poker and trying to
figure out how to get good grades
without working
the usual impulse of a college student
to crusading journalism because you pick
up the template that already exists
big business bad little activist good
big government good capitalist bad it's
the easiest thing to do if you're going
into journalism simply pick up the
template that had already been worked
out right yes plus I had no journalism
training maybe if I had gone to some
journalism school how did that happen
your older brother is now an esteemed a
medical researcher and medical
administrator went to medics med school
everybody's mother's dream child I
imagine and how did you end up Princeton
I mean that's a very expensive fancy
education and you went into journalism
and not you didn't try to become another
walter Lippmann you ended up in
television journalism
how did that happen John and my mother
said cheer in this profession with the
clowns and the jugglers what are you
going to go get a graduate degree and
get a real job it happened because I
didn't like school and I thought if I
worked for a year I might appreciate it
more and I applied and was accepted to
the University of Chicago school of
hospital management so I thought right
oof all on your brother's footsteps sort
of sort of I I was not as smart as he
I'm still not as smart as he he's
reading human action in the bathroom as
we speak but
that I didn't know what I wanted to do
with my life so it was 1969 it was a
good year for the economy lots of
companies came to campus and interviewed
undergraduates and I went to just about
all of them searching for what would
appeal what might be my career and I had
no clue but the most interesting job
offer came from this Seattle magazine
because it was in Seattle and it was the
longest free airplane ride so I thought
well I'll go see the northwest I've
never been there and then Seattle
magazine folded before I got there and
they said you want to work as a
researcher in our TV newsroom I said
sure
I had never even watched television news
and I'd never done Journal as I was the
business manager of the Daily
Princetonian and once I tried to write a
story and they said now only the
journalism to us and I got in my worst
grades in English always but I learned
through fear my immigrant parents had
always said you better work hard or
you'll freeze in the dark and I watched
what the on-air people did and I'm
ambitious and I decided more research
was good and I didn't want to be
covering politics because of my
stuttering and I noticed nobody was
really covering science or business or
medicine really I'll cover that I became
one of the first TV consumer reporters
and then I would get angry at the
businessman who I thought was cheating
people so I would do stings we would
take a TV set to a bunch of repair shops
or the loose part most would say loose
part no charge some would say I got to
take it in charges 200 bucks later and
no journalism school taught that I just
because I thought it was good television
and maybe it's not good journalism
because I was a crusading journalist and
the pompous reporters of the time did
not approve that kind of thing but that
is what buddy Miami you had a very big
career you start in local television in
Seattle you go to a local station in New
York which of course is where you go
when you're being noticed and then you
got picked up at ABC while still very
very young
good morning America than 20/20 the big
prestigious show at ABC and before long
you're a co-anchor of 20/20 all a very
big deal and as you move upward in this
career you're moving to the right
politically how come I was mugged by
reality I won the Emmys criticizing
business calling for regulation the same
story about the TV repair shops the
politicians would call after and say
that was great television we're going to
fix that we're going to pass a law and
young john stossel was so flattered all
these important people are paying
attention to me and they're created
Department of Consumer Affairs because
of that and I was so happy but then I
would do this thing again a year later
and the results were the same most
people were honest some would cheat and
I went so what's the department doing
and I'd go there and there were a bunch
of dreary desks and people filling out
forms and now they were licensing all
repair shops and that sounds good we
like licensing we license driver's
license dogs it makes people feel safe
but they weren't improving the quality
what was going on so I saw that it made
everything cost more and now if you
wanted to run a repair shop you had to
hire a lawyer just to understand the
rules if you were an immigrant maybe you
couldn't do it you will had to go
underground or you didn't do it at all
and it didn't make it better the gay and
I saw it again and again they weren't
stopping the consumer fraud that I
thought I ha the trial lawyers will do
it because they have real clout I can
just tell people they can make them pay
and compensate the victim I'd refer
people to trial lawyers because cool
consumers now were calling me and saying
this person ripped me off and so forth
how am I going to solve this government
no trial lawyers then people would call
and say my lawyer ripped me off so I
slipped at the conservative press I
looked at National Review and I you know
they seemed at the time to be wanting to
police the bedroom and police the world
and that didn't appeal to me either I
had grown up in the New York Times they
no longer made sense National Review
didn't fully make sense to me
I discovered Reason magazine the
libertarian magazine and that was an
epiphany it was oh my goodness these
people really get it and they understand
it better than I and they're talking
about Locke and John Stuart Mill I read
them in college but I didn't connect
these dots and and then I realized there
was another truth out there and I read a
little more and I became a born-again
free marketer twenty eight years at ABC
and one of the summary statements and no
they can't is as follows
what intuition tempts us to believe big
business runs the media so the media
support big business what reality taught
me the media hate business close quotes
the kind of people who go into
journalism don't like capitalism at
people at universities don't like
capitalism I'm trying to figure out what
this is about at first I thought what's
because the college professor his
slightly stupider roommate went into
business and makes more than he does so
he's envy resentful right and the wealth
disparity makes people uncomfortable
it's a byproduct of freedom if you have
a free market some people are going to
get absurdly rich and others don't have
that but then I thought about the kings
and queens of old Europe and they have
vastly more wealth than the average
person get they weren't hated they were
revered
but people hated the bourgeoisie they
gave him that nasty name they hated the
very people this is a Thomas soul in
sight they hated the very people who
sold them the things they needed to make
their lives better so I'm trying to
think what's that about and there's all
this hatred of me at the same time as I
live in Manhattan somebody came up to me
in the street and said John Stossel
yes I hope you die soon oh and at first
I thought it was because they let you
write the Peter Jennings when you passed
in the hallway Peter Jennings would
avert his eyes and more dramatically he
would go oh realize I was an
embarrassment to God it was because I
was not objective
so do they hate me because I'm a
conservative and where I live that's
like being a child molester it's the
worst thing you can be but I'm a
libertarian I'm a lousy conservative I
think homosexuality is just fine and
drugs should be legal and gam
sex work between consenting adults so I
would thought the Liberals would like me
but they're so angry because I'm a
consumer reporter defending Liz a fear
capitalism and why are they so
threatened by that and I think it's
because intuitively you think of
business as a zero-sum game or liberals
do right so if Bill Gates got a lot of
money we must have less if somebody
makes a profit I have less that's why
they hated the bourgeoisie they don't
understand that business is win-win
segment three the economy the government
meant us no they can't what intuition
tempts us to believe government can get
the economy moving again what reality
taught me
government does not spend money better
than individuals do close quote
explain that the economy is not like an
orchestra that needs a conductor to
start or a car that needs jump-starting
an economy is people with needs and if
you leave them alone they will do
amazing wonderful things to achieve
those needs and we take take them for
granted we take it for granted that a
supermarket has 30,000 products and
they're all cheap and it's well lit it's
open 24/7 and they rarely poison us
people do stuff if we don't get in the
way and the Keynesian ins in the
administration we're saying we can spend
money better than the private sector can
we have to start it and this multiplier
effect right it's just nonsense the
government can create jobs that created
jobs building pyramids but think how
much wealthier that Egyptians would have
been had they been free to pursue their
own interests
John former the financial crisis of 2008
former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan
testifying before Congress hey Alan
Greenspan I note for you my libertarian
friend my reader of Reason magazine was
a disciple and friend of ein Rand as
libertarian as they come Allen Joines
well okay wasn't any more quote well
then this quote your glory no way yes it
is that in a way in a way I testified
before Congress I Alan Greenspan I made
a mistake in presuming that the
self-interest of banks was
such that they were best capable of
protecting their own shareholders that
the loan officers of those institutions
knew more about the risks involved than
even our best regulators a critical
pillar to free markets did break down
that shocked me I still do not fully
understand why it happened closed quote
if Alan Greenspan says that the
financial crisis of 2008 was a market
failure who is John Stossel to gainsay
him and who's John Stossel when Hank
Paulson and Tim Geithner and all these
very smart
Wall Street experts say they had to bail
these people out yeah yeah
why was that what's the how do you put
the a lot of people will say right okay
I'm with you in the great general
archive sort of the Matt Ridley argument
if you start a thousand years ago the
upward climb is impressive but come on
John we've got problems with capitalism
it needs adjustment it needs oversight
latest example 2008 and John Stossel
replies the oversight won't work and the
overseers will never understand the
banking business and the tricks or the
cheating as well as the cheaters and the
tricksters will so you can pass
sarbanes-oxley after Enron that's going
to end all the scams in the future and
that didn't stop Bernie Madoff or the
housing bubble and dodd-frank isn't
going to stop this either and Alan
Greenspan's problem I believe is that
watching from the point of view of the
media over these years is that the
people closest to the panic always get
too scared mmm the global warming
scientists say we have to take action
against global warming the bird flu
doctors want all our money to go to
researching bird flu the killer bee
coming up from Mexico going to sting
assaulting to death the y2k computer
experts said the planes are going to
crash they all want government action
Robert Higgs said war is the friend of
the state well so is crisis and fear
the thing is that the global warming
experts and the Killer Bee experts
not in the Treasury Department it did
not have the power to scarf up a
trillion of your dollars and give it to
their friends who were scared and
calling from Goldman Sachs oh my god
it's the end of the world I'm losing
everything you have to rescue this
company and they got scared I argue
market discipline will protect us better
and that means no privileges no bailouts
ok so let me just let me summarize
Damon's what intuition tempts us to
believe some institutions are too big to
fail what reality taught me failure
makes markets work okay so let's just
you're saying that the mr. conventional
wisdom is now that the government made a
big mistake in failing to bail out
Lehman Brothers that was the mistake
that was what caused the trouble
Stossel says no no no to go back the
mistake was the bailout was was
supporting Bear Stearns and arranging a
sale saving the instance should let him
go down the mistake was bailing out AIG
that's your position right here Stearns
would have at the right price found a
buyer for whatever assets they have left
likewise okay a.m. so your argument is
not that absent government intervention
there would have been no crisis your
argument is we're human beings we live
in a fallen world people screw up
sometimes they screw up in large ways
capitalism will experience crises the
government would make it worse you're
not saying that it would be crisis less
without the government you're simply
saying the government would make it
worse right or doesn't yes but it's
worse than that I'm saying more than
that I'm saying government caused the
crisis Canada didn't have the same
housing bubble they don't have a Fannie
and Freddie and they have the same rate
of homeownership and government makes it
worse because Greenspan pump too too
much liquidity into into the system
perhaps probably but more we have the
FHA and all these agencies subsidizing
reckless behavior okay no they can't
what intuition tempts us to believe if
auto companies are in trouble government
should encourage the purchase of new
cars
I'm giving you an easy one after Alan
Greenspan what reality taught me wealth
will be destroyed and poor people will
be hurt okay go ahead take a stick to
cash for clunkers
it's it's again intuitive though on the
book tour a woman came up to me and said
intuitive is a lousy word that you use
because intuition is generally right I
said well what's a better word she said
we're imprinted well I think she may be
right and conditioned right yeah it's or
instinct and the instinct is often right
but when cash for clunkers came out a
lot of people said oh yeah this makes
sense the auto business is struggling
path people three thousand dollars get
rid of old cars and they pollute more
will clean the air a little and
stimulate the auto business but again
government has no money of its own the
$3,000 comes from somebody comes taken
from the private sector now some of us
might have bought a car that year some
of us had our purchases sped up the
money went to the auto companies it gave
a bubble in car purchases but then that
goes down on the other end more
importantly what did they do with these
junked cars they destroyed them it
really shows government arrogance to
think you can create wealth by
destroying things Nancy Pelosi believed
that and said that after the Haitian
earthquake
this will cause a boom in Haiti she said
because of the construction work paul
krugman no real price i was going to go
ahead leave that said that about 9/11
but it will cause some construction but
it's the Frederic Bastiat broken window
fallacy a boy breaks a store window
hey he's creating the job for a janitor
and a glass maker but that's the scene
benefit we can see that work right what
we can't see is that that money is what
that money might have been used for had
the window not been broken maybe the
storekeeper would have bought a shirt
maybe even would have cured cancer John
what about the great you've just batted
away the 2008 crisis what about the
great Keynes is it a crisis Matt the
stock market fell a lot but in 82 the
stock market was at 800 so we have the
14,000 and fell to 8,000 it had had an
amazing run that's because you're
working at Midtown instead of downtown
so it wasn't a crisis it was horrible
for them but
crisis is the Revolutionary War soldiers
freezing when the British are coming or
the Civil War or the bubonic plague
there if there's a crisis a VAR crises
okay listen the great Keynesian example
is the economic benefit to the United
States of the second world war we can
agree I think probably you and I do
agree that the evidence
amedy slays and her forgotten man the
evidence that the New Deal actually
lifted the economy is zero it moved
things around it did favored some people
didn't get thing but the Second World
War comes along the country shifts to a
war footing government spending expands
enormous Lee and the economy hums how
come if it's not government spending if
it's not the Keynesian argument that the
private sector is spending too little
once the government kicks in even if
it's war spending you get an economy
humming it's a great question I'm not a
student of that my understanding is you
had great national purpose people worked
together the economy really started
humming after the war he may remember
you may have read um when the soldiers
were all coming home people said
unemployment it's going to be hugely
high and yet it wasn't those soldiers
found new things to do and that to my
understanding caused the boom but I'm
not a student of that segment for john
stossel's cold cold miserable heart no
they can't quote my wife used to
complain used to I'm interested in that
used to complain that libertarian
reasoning is cold-hearted since markets
produce winners and losers and many
losers did nothing wrong market
competition is cruel she had a point
didn't she
market competition is cruel there are
winners and losers but that's better
than the alternative where there are
only losers all right the President of
the United States on simple fairness and
you pay close attention to this please
that means we have to make choices when
it comes to paying down the deficit and
investing in our future should we ask
middle-class Americans
pay even more at a time when their
budgets are already stretched to the
breaking point or should we ask some of
the wealthiest Americans to pay their
fair share
that's the choice the Buffett Rule the
Buffett Rule rich people should be asked
to pay at least the same proportion of
their income as middle-class people
transparent is transparently fair right
it sure feels fair and I think it's a
good political selling point it's a much
harder point to say they're not going to
pay it no matter what because the rich
people are going to hire accountant and
lawyer tricksters to escape it or move
out of the jurisdiction or worse they're
going to do less and some of them are
the golden geese who provide opportunity
for poor people my response Dupree and
these are much tougher things to say in
simple politics it's a tough battle
there's Obama is very clever but I say
to him give me a break you and Bush
doubled spending under Clinton we spent
two trillion now we're approaching four
trillion it's the spending stupid don't
talk to me about taxes and Milton
Friedman was right he says the tax
levels are not what count government
spending is what's counts as a
percentage of the economy doesn't matter
if it's paid for in taxes or borrowing
sooner or later will be paid for by us
great ok a couple big facts about
American history here's one Ronald
Reagan
broadly speaking cut taxes and roll back
regulations and the economy boomed and
then Bill Kent Bill Clinton resists the
left in his own party essentially
ratifying he raises taxes a little bit
but he's essentially ratifying the
Reagan program of relatively low tax
regime relatively limited regulation and
the economy continues to boom so we get
in some modest way at least the John
Stossel program 25 years ago and we get
25 years of economic growth as a result
and now we have Barack Obama saying
Obamacare is a good thing
extending government control over
one-sixth of the economy and by the way
we need higher taxes democracy just
doesn't
work we don't learn we don't learn we
have the example before our very eyes
and we refuse to learn from it cheer me
up no I'm not going to argue with you
it's upsetting to me Thomas Jefferson
said the natural progress of things
government grows liberty yields so
against that lamentable fact which
distress is both of us you have the rise
of the Tea Party
you have John's this will surely be your
third bestseller to the chagrin of the
New York Times which will which will rue
the print a test the ink it has to use
to print it on the bestseller list do
you sense the country in this election
year moving into a kind of rebellion
against this huge state or at least
against Barack Obama it's it's nothing
that's not the case though is it it's a
close call is it it's a close call and
the betting has sprockie Bhama likely to
be reelected the tea party was exciting
and some were holding the Constitution
really we're going to go back to that I
didn't even know people were interested
and looks as though the Supreme Court
might even go back to it if you listen
to the oral arguments on Obamacare
earlier but a lot of tea party people
say don't cut my Medicare and nobody
wants their programs caught on the other
hand the positive side I didn't think
welfare reform was possible right and we
don't have to stop the growth of
government we just have to slow its
growth we could grow our way out of this
and Paul Ryan issues his budget plan he
gets portrayed as pushing grandma off a
cliff and in seven months since he did
that the country's changed now he says
my plan was too timid I'm ready to do a
little more so there's some movement
right okay here's another big fact about
American history from the New Deal on
federal welfare spending is increased in
real terms every year even during the
Reagan years they shrink the growth rate
but there's no actual cut in welfare
spending it just keeps growing and
Milton Friedman told us why Milton
Friedman and James Buchanan uh and
others have told us why it's built in to
the structure you talk here about
intuition what's built into us there's
something that's built in
the structure of the government namely a
special interest will always have it in
its interest to lobby for bigger for a
more government if you're GM you're very
happy to get bailed out if you're
goldman sachs you're very happy to get
bailed out if you're this or that
insurance organization Abama care i'm a
cotton farmer I'm gonna fight for my
subsidies if I'm a consumer I'm only
paying a buck or two and that's a hard
it's not quite the problem intuition is
wrong right because this is something
where the rational actor who is
responding to reality this interest
group that interest group the other
interest you it is they correctly judge
it to be in their interest to push for
more government so what do we do about
that you're depressing me I don't know
what to do
Jonathan Rose called a demo sclerosis
all I can say so there is one thing we
can do to stop okay bye everybody a copy
of nobody can get me on the bestseller
list with Rachel Maddow and then the
book gets discounted and these ideas get
out ok so here's one more this is that
this is the question it's still a
question I don't know the I mean we've
moved to the portion of the program
we're asking questions where I don't I
really don't suspect that I know the
answer I really just want to hear what
you have to say so set barack obama
aside for a moment I feel like Henny
Youngman take my wife play set him aside
please Chris Christie in New Jersey
takes the union's on frontal attack and
his ratings are now up Bobby Jindal
attacks the bureaucracy in Louisiana and
it gets reelected by some 70 percent you
see governor's taking mitch daniels in
indiana now in it I think he's in his
seventh year he's that deep into his
second term cuts taxes gets a
constitutional amendment to lower
property taxes permanently and the guys
ratings are in the 60 or 70 percent so
why does it work at the state level at
least when there is a governor who has
real guts Ronald Reagan at the federal
level but I mean oh but didn't now see
here's the problem we're now we're
creeping toward wanting heroes and
you've already told us we shouldn't be
looking for heroes well we need a strong
person to cut that's true we shouldn't
think of them as heroes but we want a
strong
person to cut and also Canada cut and
Luis Fortuno in Puerto Rico fired twenty
thousand workers Scott Walker in
Wisconsin all that fuss he didn't fire
anybody and when I interviewed Fortuno
he said my advice to politicians do it
early in your term like a band-aid rip
it off and then like with Reagan we will
you know people don't want to see cuts
people don't want to see public sector
workers fired
I do but normal people don't but they
will stay notice results so then we
researched it yeah I mean there were
these people you mentioned in John
Engler of Michigan right and we couldn't
find anybody else in recent history so I
hope but couldn't I hope for Tonio gets
to be popular in Canada it was a liberal
government to do it it was like Nixon
going to China right
okay segment five our last segment john
war and peace no they can't
what intuition tempts us to believe
lunatics want to murder us so we must
kill them over there before they kill us
over here what reality taught me such
thinking leads to an over extended
military close quote so here's where we
probe the extent to which you as a
libertarian are willing to make common
cause with conservatives in the extent
to which note you really are a
libertarian and that leads to different
conclusions so are you with Ron Paul the
war in Iraq was a terrible mistake and
we should get out of Afghanistan as fast
as we can I mean I cringe to say this on
your television show but yes okay and to
be clear Ron Paul also says if we get
attacked attack back and we were right
to attack Afghanistan for harboring for
harboring al-qaeda and I also begin the
chapter by saying I'm nervous about this
one I'm not a student of the military
but I'm just a guy who watches
government fail the Millett the military
has a brownie recipe that's 25 pages
wrong long government is inefficient
that everything it does why would
nation-building why would defense be
different okay now because I so like you
and admire your work John I'm going to
work really hard to find but we you
would grant this much I think excuse me
you would grant this much I hope
even our joint hero Milton Friedman
would say that defense is one of the few
legitimate absolute duties of the
federal government okay so he is strong
so is until the case I'm just thinking
of just hoping that we can agree on a
kind of little little tiny piece of
intellectual framework err isn't it the
case that whereas when it comes to
domestic spending if you're not sure of
the right amount to spend you should for
sure or on the side of spending less
defense is different if you're not sure
of the right amount to spend you ought
to spend more don't you think sure okay
but we need to reevaluate the mission I
mean it's an automatic pilot the same
amount every year Army Navy Air Force
just about 30,000 troops in South Korea
they're freeloading off of us 30,000 in
Japan 50,000 right y-yeah okay
the current political scene I have to
note by the way they didn't know they
can't your is rough on Republicans as
you were on Democrats and you note that
under george w bush the republicans
engaged in the biggest increase in
discretionary domestic spending since
Lyndon Johnson and the Great Society and
he hired 9,000 new regulators did he I
didn't okay uh so the current scene
during oral arguments earlier this
spring on the constitutionality of
Obamacare Supreme Court Justice Anthony
Kennedy made the following observation
when the federal government tells the
citizen he must purchase insurance or
face penalties then quote that changes
the relationship of the federal
government to the individual in a very
fundamental way close quote
you'd agree yeah okay so how much of a
problem is it that Mitt Romney enacted
an individual mandate in Massachusetts
and was willing to for the state
government to do what Justice Kennedy
said the federal government could not do
without altering the relationship with
the citizen fundamentally it's a problem
for him it is a defense the defense he
uses that we've got 50
dates don't we have 50 laboratories and
so your person you're comfortable with
that well no I think the mandate is a
problem and I'd be the supreme court
that what they're what they once ruled
is this poor wheat farmer in Kansas was
it
he wasn't free to grow more wheat on his
own land that he didn't even sell
because it might affect the price
elsewhere and they they get to control
that I mean if the Supreme Court is now
waking up and say this changes the
relationship good okay overdue to see
what what I'm poking around for here
here we have a this marvelous by the way
I should state that it's beautifully
beautiful I did like the book it is
really I keep quoting these summary
statements but the argument the research
is a it's a really wonderful book John
and it's an indictment and what I'm
trying to probe for here is how do you
use the political system to fix some of
this stuff and so what I'm looking for
here is the stasi emitter how
enthusiastic can you be about Mitt
Romney as the Republican nominee I know
your libertarian you'd prefer Ron Paul
Ron Paul ain't going to be the nominee
how do you he's going to catch on next
week okay it isn't over yet people wake
up and look I would prefer Romney over
Obama but Romney says things like I'm
going to cut the government workforce
10% by attrition he's quick to add I
mean by attrition it's it's then the bad
people stay the good ones lead that's
not management they're easy so afraid of
making hard decisions Jack Welch when he
ran GE said it's the job of a manager to
identify the bottom 10% and get them out
it's creative destruction but Romney at
least wouldn't blow government more as
President Obama continues to propose
okay a little hard to get elected if the
slogan is
Romney he's not as bad as the other guy
though all right maybe not Oh again
individuals should act not government so
let me probe you again how should
individuals who read this book think
about their relation to the American
political system and this is on my mind
because it's a conversation I had just a
week ago with
friend who was a high tech mogul real
started a big company here and I and
like many of us he's distressed about
the state of affairs here in California
and I said well what do you intend to do
about it and he said oh nothing I wrote
off California years ago every bit of my
energy I put into my company I've
thought that's not just for profit it's
the best way I can do good in the amount
of time that I have left to me well on
the one hand that the very bracing
statement of the libertarian point of
view on the other hand if all the good
guys withdraw from politics things get
worse immediately so what do you say
about that well he's got a business so
he has a good argument to say I'm good
at helping people by expanding my
business and that's wonderful that
creates jobs and profits which do good
things but you're right we need
participation we need activists that's
what I'm saying yeah we got to
participate in politics go tell them no
they can't and maybe when we watch other
countries blow up and maybe California
and Illinois will be our example of
failure oh thanks a lot we're doing a
good job of cheering each other up here
John no they can't have last last
question or a couple of questions here
quote it didn't take me long to
understand you're talking now about
getting started in your career in
television didn't take me long to
understand that almost every news story
should draw attention to some terrible
problem homelessness illegitimate see
the crack cocaine epidemic there was
almost always just one answer government
should do something that was the
template for television journalism still
it and it still is so what's your advice
to the I don't know for all what's just
the suppository Princeton graduating
this June who's interested in journalism
and wants to be like John Stossel what's
your advice learn economics and look
around see the miracles the private
sector does that you can stick a piece
of plastic in the wall and cash will
come out so you can go to a foreign
country and hand that piece of plastic
to a total stranger doesn't even speak
your language and he'll rent you a car
for a week and when you get home Visa or
MasterCard will have the accounting
correct to the penny
and government can't even count the
votes accurately so stop saying
government's got to do something
government's got to do less the founders
had it right America grew fastest when
government was one or two percent of the
economy let's move back in that
direction let them leave us alone John
Stossel
author of no they can't why government
fails but individuals succeed thank you
and keep that put up the sign we should
please one more time no they can't for
uncommon knowledge I'm Peter Robinson